feat: YDB JOOQ extension doc (#8933)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/integrations/orm/jooq.md

> # JOOQ Extension for use with {{ ydb-short-name }}
> 
> This guide is intended for use with [JOOQ](https://www.jooq.org/) and {{ ydb-short-name }}.
> 
> JOOQ is a Java library that allows you to create type-safe SQL queries by generating Java classes from a database schema and using convenient query builders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# JOOQ extension for {{ ydb-short-name }}

This guide explains how to use [JOOQ](https://www.jooq.org/) with {{ ydb-short-name }}.

JOOQ is a Java library that allows you to create type-safe SQL queries by generating Java classes from a database schema and providing convenient query builders.
```

## Generating Java Classes {#generated-java-classes}

> You can generate Java classes using any tools provided on the [official JOOQ website](https://www.jooq.org/doc/latest/manual/code-generation/codegen-configuration/). Two dependencies are required: {{ ydb-short-name }} JDBC driver and JOOQ extension for {{ ydb-short-name }}, as well as two parameters:
> 
> - `database.name`: `tech.ydb.jooq.codegen.YdbDatabase` (mandatory setting)
> - `strategy.name`: `tech.ydb.jooq.codegen.YdbGeneratorStrategy` (recommended setting)
> 
> Let's look at an example of the `maven` plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can generate Java classes using any of the tools provided on the [official JOOQ website](https://www.jooq.org/doc/latest/manual/code-generation/codegen-configuration/). Two dependencies are required: the [{{ ydb-short-name }} JDBC driver](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-jdbc-driver) and the JOOQ extension for {{ ydb-short-name }}, along with two parameters:

- `database.name`: `tech.ydb.jooq.codegen.YdbDatabase` (mandatory setting)
- `strategy.name`: `tech.ydb.jooq.codegen.YdbGeneratorStrategy` (recommended setting)

An example using the `maven` plugin:
```

```xml
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.jooq</groupId>
    <artifactId>jooq-codegen-maven</artifactId>
    <version>3.19.11</version>
    <executions>
        <execution>
            <goals>
                <goal>generate</goal>
            </goals>
        </execution>
    </executions>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>tech.ydb.jdbc</groupId>
            <artifactId>ydb-jdbc-driver</artifactId>
            <version>${ydb.jdbc.version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>tech.ydb.dialects</groupId>
            <artifactId>jooq-ydb-dialect</artifactId>
            <version>${jooq.ydb.version}</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
    <configuration>
        <jdbc>
            <driver>tech.ydb.jdbc.YdbDriver</driver>
            <url>jdbc:ydb:grpc://localhost:2136/local</url>
        </jdbc>
        <generator>
            <strategy>
                <name>tech.ydb.jooq.codegen.YdbGeneratorStrategy</name>
            </strategy>
            <database>
                <name>tech.ydb.jooq.codegen.YdbDatabase</name>

>                 <!-- исключение системных таблицы -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                <!-- excluding system tables -->
```

                <excludes>.sys.*</excludes>
            </database>
            <target>
                <packageName>ydb</packageName>
                <directory>./src/main/java</directory>
            </target>
        </generator>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
```

> Example of generated classes from [YQL tutorial](../../dev/yql-tutorial/create_demo_tables.md):

Reviewer: It'd be helpful to post the full classes somewhere on GitHub and give a link to them here.

```
ydb/DefaultCatalog.java
ydb/default_schema
ydb/default_schema/tables
ydb/default_schema/tables/Seasons.java
ydb/default_schema/tables/records
ydb/default_schema/tables/records/SeriesRecord.java
ydb/default_schema/tables/records/EpisodesRecord.java
ydb/default_schema/tables/records/SeasonsRecord.java
ydb/default_schema/tables/Series.java
ydb/default_schema/tables/Episodes.java
ydb/default_schema/Indexes.java
ydb/default_schema/Keys.java
ydb/default_schema/Tables.java
ydb/default_schema/DefaultSchema.java
```

## Usage {#usage}

To integrate {{ ydb-short-name }} with JOOQ into your project, you need to add two dependencies: {{ ydb-short-name }} JDBC Driver and the JOOQ extension for {{ ydb-short-name }}.

Examples for different build systems:

{% list tabs %}

- Maven

    ```xml
    <!-- Set actual versions -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>tech.ydb.jdbc</groupId>
        <artifactId>ydb-jdbc-driver</artifactId>
        <version>${ydb.jdbc.version}</version>
    </dependency>

    <dependency>
        <groupId>tech.ydb.dialects</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-data-jdbc-ydb</artifactId>
        <version>${spring.data.jdbc.ydb}</version> 

>     </dependency>

Reviewer: This looks like an incorrect copy-paste from a neighboring Spring JDBC article.

>     ```

Reviewer: There was a similar example in lines 16-60: why do you give a complete example first and then repeat a small part of it?

- Gradle

    ```groovy
    dependencies {
        // Set actual versions

>         implementation "tech.ydb.dialects:spring-data-jdbc-ydb:$ydbDialectVersion"

Reviewer: also Spring JDBC

        implementation "tech.ydb.jdbc:ydb-jdbc-driver:$ydbJdbcVersion"
    }
    ```

{% endlist %}

> To obtain a `YdbDSLContext` (an extension of `org.jooq.DSLContext`), use the `tech.ydb.jooq.YDB` class. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To obtain a `YdbDSLContext` class instance (an extension of `org.jooq.DSLContext`), use the `tech.ydb.jooq.YDB` class. For example:
```

```java

> String url = "jdbc:ydb:<grpc/grpcs>://<host>:<2135/2136>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]";

Reviewer: An endpoint has already been specified above at line 43; why is it needed two times?

Author: Первый URL для генерации Java классов с помощью мавен плагина. Это обычно делается через докер, накатив предварительно схему

> String url = "jdbc:ydb:<grpc/grpcs>://<host>:<2135/2136>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]";

Reviewer: `<...>` in our documentation is usually used just to name a placeholder (not to list all options), then below the example, each placeholder needs to be explained.

Connection conn = DriverManager.getConnection(url);

YdbDSLContext dsl = YDB.using(conn);
```

or

```java
String url = "jdbc:ydb:<grpc/grpcs>://<host>:<2135/2136>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]";
try(CloseableYdbDSLContext dsl = YDB.using(url)) {
        // ...
}
```

Extend `JooqAutoConfiguration.DslContextConfiguration` with your own `YdbDSLContext`. For example:

```java
@Configuration
public class YdbJooqConfiguration extends JooqAutoConfiguration.DslContextConfiguration {

    @Override
    public YdbDSLContextImpl dslContext(org.jooq.Configuration configuration) {
        return YdbDSLContextImpl(configuration);
    }
}
```

```properties
spring.datasource.driver-class-name=tech.ydb.jdbc.YdbDriver

> spring.datasource.url=jdbc:ydb:<grpc/grpcs>://<host>:<2135/2136>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]

Reviewer: If this indeed is intended to be used inside the Spring Framework, let's make separate examples for each scenario and explicitly explain what options are available.

```

> `YdbDSLContext` is ready to use. Let's look at examples of specific YQL queries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`YdbDSLContext` is ready to use.

 ## Examples of specific YQL queries
```

> The [`UPSERT`](../../yql/reference/syntax/upsert_into.md) command:

Reviewer: Let's add a YQL query corresponding to each of these snippets.

```java
public void upsert(YdbDSLContext context) {
    context.upsertInto(EPISODES)
            .set(record)
            .execute();
}
```

The [`REPLACE`](../../yql/reference/syntax/replace_into.md) command:

```java
public void replace(YdbDSLContext context) {
    ydbDSLContext.replaceInto(EPISODES)
            .set(record)
            .execute();
}
```

> To specify an index in the VIEW statement, you must use the `useIndex` method on `Table`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify a [secondary index](../../concepts/secondary_indexes.md) in the `VIEW` statement, you must use the `useIndex` method on `Table`:
```

    // ...
}
```

`YdbDSLContext` is ready to use.

## YQL statements

The following statements are available from the YQL syntax in `YdbDSLContext`:

- [`UPSERT`](../../yql/reference/syntax/upsert_into.md):

```java
// generated SQL:
// upsert into `episodes` (`series_id`, `season_id`, `episode_id`, `title`, `air_date`) 
// values (?, ?, ?, ?, ?)
public void upsert(YdbDSLContext context) {
    context.upsertInto(EPISODES)
            .set(record)
            .execute();
}
```

- [`REPLACE`](../../yql/reference/syntax/replace_into.md):

```java
// generated SQL:
// replace into `episodes` (`series_id`, `season_id`, `episode_id`, `title`, `air_date`) 
// values (?, ?, ?, ?, ?)
public void replace(YdbDSLContext context) {
    ydbDSLContext.replaceInto(EPISODES)
            .set(record)
            .execute();
}
```

- `VIEW index_name`:

```java
// generated SQL:
// select `series`.`series_id`, `series`.`title`, `series`.`series_info`, `series`.`release_date` 
// from `series` view `title_name` where `series`.`title` = ?
var record = ydbDSLContext.selectFrom(SERIES.useIndex(Indexes.TITLE_NAME.name))
        .where(SERIES.TITLE.eq(title))
        .fetchOne();
```

> In all other respects, the {{ ydb-short-name }} dialect follows the JOOQ documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all other respects, the {{ ydb-short-name }} dialect follows the [JOOQ documentation](https://www.jooq.org/doc/latest/manual/).
```

### Spring Boot Configuration

Extend `JooqAutoConfiguration.DslContextConfiguration` with your own `YdbDSLContext`. For example:

```java
@Configuration
public class YdbJooqConfiguration extends JooqAutoConfiguration.DslContextConfiguration {

    @Override
    public YdbDSLContextImpl dslContext(org.jooq.Configuration configuration) {
        return YdbDSLContextImpl(configuration);
    }
}
```

```properties
spring.datasource.driver-class-name=tech.ydb.jdbc.YdbDriver
spring.datasource.url=jdbc:ydb:<schema>://<host>:<port>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]
```

> An example of a simple Spring Boot application can be found [here](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-java-examples/tree/master/jdbc/spring-jooq).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A complete example of a simple Spring Boot application can be found [here](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-java-examples/tree/master/jdbc/spring-jooq).
```
